[THEME MUSIC]
>> If you're anything like
me, you want to age well.
You want to be
neurologically sharp.
You want to be physically fit.
And you want to defy aging.
You probably have a great diet.
You want to meditate
to manage your stress.
And you probably have a
no-fail exercise routine.
Because you've been told,
if you do these things,
that enhances longevity.
Because you've been told,
if you do these things,
you will have a sharp mind.
You will have an agile, able
body, and you will defy aging.
My clinical practice focuses
on environmental medicine
and women's health.
Environmental medicine
is the interplay
between the environment and
how it impacts our health.
And while this does impact
everyone, for women,
there are some specific targets.
I've been seeing
patients for 25 years
and I consider myself to be
growing old alongside of them,
watching them go from
three years old to having
their own babies, saying
goodbye to some family
members as they pass on.
And it's been fascinating to
watch how some of these people
get diagnoses and what the
issues they encounter are.
And I'm sure that some of these
issues that they experience
are because we have
been sold a myth.
We have been sold
a myth that beauty
requires dangerous chemicals.
Is that even true anymore?
I don't think so.
And we assume that when
we go to the store,
we can grab something
off the shelf
and it's safe because somebody
else has checked on that for us.
Is that really happening?
Most of the things we see
on the shelves these days,
nobody has checked
on the safety.
None of this has
been here before.
Picture your grandparents'
bathroom cabinets.
Did you see lip plumper
and gel nails there?
Probably not.
We haven't seen these things
before, and none of them
are acutely dangerous
or immediately fatal.
But generally, nature
doesn't have a role in these.
And when nature doesn't have a
role, there will be a backlash,
I promise.
I started seeing
something recently
that changed everything for me.
I couldn't ignore it anymore.
I kept seeing people
in their younger years
with cognitive challenges--
brain fog, memory loss,
depression, anxiety, insomnia.
The brain is inflamed.
And when I looked at the general
things that caused this-- sleep,
stress, mood, food--
it didn't make sense.
I had a 45-year-old woman come
in, seemingly at the prime
of her life, with
cognitive challenges.
She couldn't repeat back to
me four numerical digits.
She couldn't make
a grocery list,
and she got lost
driving in her own town.
We had to dig deep to figure
out what was going on.
And we ultimately found that
she had some detoxification
challenges that prevented
her from excreting toxins.
So she had this
accumulation of toxins
that were impacting her brain.
Our environment is
changing so rapidly,
our biology can't keep up.
Our accumulations are stacking
one on top of the other.
And there are few policies in
place to protect our health.
It used to be that your
grandmother or aunt that was 90
would go to a birthday party
or a Christmas celebration
and not know which it was.
And we weren't that
concerned because she was 90.
This is a common cause of aging.
But now I'm seeing that in
people that are 60 and 70.
How is this all going
to look in 20 years?
Will they even be
neurologically intact?
And what about teenagers?
Are they even optimal
in their adolescence?
The thunderbolt
moment came for me
when I realized, yes,
we can address dementia,
Parkinson's, MS, memory loss.
But shouldn't we
be looking upstream
at what is causing this?
As a naturopathic doctor,
I am trained to look
at the cause of a problem
versus treating the symptoms.
And as I really started to
contemplate what is going on
here, I realized that
the root cause of this
is happening before we
take our first breath.
So it's very
complicated, of course.
Here's a couple of
things to think about.
One, we were all assured
that the placenta was
this magical barrier
that protected the baby
from the outside environment.
In fact, babies
are arriving here
with a documented 287 chemicals
in their umbilical cord blood
samples at the time of birth.
Is that what's causing
ADD and autism?
Nobody has studied
the chemical cocktail
on the developing
brain or that fetus.
And, two, there's a concept
called vertical transmission.
Picture a line going all the way
through your maternal lineage.
What your great-grandmother
was exposed to--
her genetics, her epigenetics,
her total toxic load--
she passed to your grandmother.
Your grandmother passed
it to your mother,
and your mother passed that
along with all of her exposures
to you, and you passed
it to your children.
So I know that is
an ugly visual.
It's a dire topic.
It's really depressing.
But now that we see
the problem, herein
lies the opportunity
to change it.
If prevention is
possible, what would you
do if you could affect
your future lineage
by avoiding toxic exposure?
What would you do if you
could protect your egg quality
by avoiding those toxins?
And what would you do if you
knew you could strengthen
your great-great-grandchildren?
All we have to do
is avoid toxins.
That's pretty easy.
Not really.
They're everywhere.
We have a lot of
involuntary exposures,
and they are hard to find if
you don't know where to look.
I didn't know when I was
pre-conception, or even pregnant
for that matter, what was in my
control and what was at stake.
And you didn't either.
But now we know.
And so in order
to create a shift,
we have to create a movement.
Women want to focus
on the nursery.
They want to buy
organic crib sheets,
they want to buy
non-toxic paint,
and they want to buy
unscented laundry detergent.
But upstream of
that, before we spend
one night in that
crib, that baby,
we need to focus
on what is being
driven through that placenta.
Babies are overexposed
in the uterus.
We need to create
a movement, and we
need to support women so that
they think about detoxifying
before they conceive.
That seems so obvious.
Duh, you want to detoxify
before you conceive,
but how many women have sat
down in my office and said,
I want to get pregnant in a few
months and I want to do a detox?
We can't do that because
we have been accumulating
these toxins over a
long period of time,
in fact, generationally.
So it's not safe
to mobilize those
too soon before you conceive.
We need time to do this.
But wait, there is power in
the hands of the consumers.
What you eat matters,
where you shop matters,
what you buy matters.
And women are the gatekeepers
of health for their family.
They make the appointments
for their family,
they research
healthy alternatives,
and they do most
of the shopping.
So marketers are watching you.
So, what is in your control?
Couple of things--
exposure and elimination.
We are overexposed and
our elimination pathways
are suboptimal.
But these are things
we can affect.
With exposures, if you
leave today with one thing,
I want you to pay attention
to your fragrance and plastic
exposures.
Both of these things
impact reproductive
health, the neurologic
terrain of that unborn baby,
and pregnancy outcome.
This is well-established
in the medical literature.
And elimination.
Most of us think about
just the liver when
we think about detoxification.
But we also have skin, liver,
lymph, bowel, and kidney
that are working on our behalf.
So if you want to
support your liver,
have a couple extra servings
of dark green leafy vegetables
and throw some turmeric
in your smoothie.
Make sure you have a
bowel movement every day.
More is better.
Drink 2 to 3 liters of water
to support your kidneys
because they are working on
your behalf 24/7 to eliminate
the exposures you have seen.
The skin is the highway
of elimination of toxins
through sweat, so get a sweat.
And the lymph is
this magical organ
that mobilizes toxins through
your lymphatic channels
when your muscles
compress around them.
So even walking
supports detoxification.
So we're designed to detox,
which is a great thing.
So, how would this
look different
if you knew at the time
that you were pregnant,
that everything you touched
and everything you consumed
could impact your future baby?
And what would be
different if we
knew that while we were
gestating our daughters,
we were impacting
our granddaughters?
And imagine detoxifying for
a year before you conceive.
Would the neurologic
terrain of that baby
be so different that they would
look different as a teenager
or as an adult?
There is power in this
to shift your lineage,
to create strength and vitality
for your family to come.
Now, that's worth talking about.
[APPLAUSE]
[THEME MUSIC]